S3 must be the most loved of all AWS services.
It's a storage service that allows you to store files with a simple API
and takes care of scalability, durability, security,
and a whole bunch of other things with very little effort on the developer side.
S3 is becoming the ubiquitous cloud storage platform
and powers a large variety of use cases.
And for some of these use cases, performance really matters.
So if you're building a product that relies heavily on S3,
there are a few interesting optimizations that you might want to leverage.
In today's episode, we're going to talk about some of the lessons
we've learned and some of the tips and tricks
that we've discovered along the way working with S3 at scale.
My name is Eoin, I'm joined by Luciano
and this is another episode of the AWS Bites podcast.
AWS Bites is brought to you by fourTheorem,
an AWS consulting partner with tons of experience with S3.
If you need someone to work with you to optimize your S3-based workloads,
check out fourtheorem.com or contact us directly using the links in the show notes.
We already spoke about S3 best practices back in episode 33.
Now that was more of a generic episode on a variety of best practices
that are relevant to using S3, but we did give a quick intro
on what S3 is, the related terminology.
So if you haven't checked it out, it might be a good one to go back to.
Today though, we're going to assume you already have a little bit of basic knowledge
about the service and how it works, and we're going to focus mostly on performance.
But let's give a brief intro. Luciano, where would you like to start?
I think it's a good idea to still review how S3 works under the hood, because I think understanding, at least at the high level, what's the machinery behind it,
it's important to really understand why certain performance or activities actually work.
So if we want to just start with some stats,
this is something that we can just observe to understand the scale of the service.
And this is coming from a presentation that's maybe a little bit obsolete at this point,
because it's a presentation from reInvent that was delivered in 2021,
called Deep Dive on Amazon S3.
It's a really good one, so we'll leave the link in the show notes.
But the data that they share there is that S3 stores exabytes of data.
This is 1 billion gigabytes, I had to look that up, across millions of drives.
So you can imagine that AWS somehow has to manage this huge amount of physical drives
where all your data is going to be stored in a way or another.
So this is the level of complexity that AWS is taking care of for you,
so you don't have to worry about the kind of management of physical devices.
Now, there are a list that's, what they say, trillions of objects stored in various S3 markets.
So all these drives are effectively a distributed system that shares all these trillions of objects.
And the service can handle millions of requests per second.
So I hope that all these numbers give you an idea of the volume and the scale of the service.
There is another one, they even say that they can reach a peak of 60 terabytes per second of data processed.
So again, how is that magic happening?
We don't necessarily know all the implementation details.
But the interesting thing to know is that AWS does all of this at scale and still guarantees data durability.
And the way they do that is by storing your data in multiple copies in different places.
So we are obviously talking about the distributed system here,
because it wouldn't be possible to reach this level of scalability with just one big machine, of course.
Now, if we remember the networking basics, you know that there are regions,
and inside regions there are availability zones.
And you can imagine an availability zone as a separate data center with independent connectivity, power, and so on.
So in most cases, and I say in most cases because there are certain configurations that you can tweak,
but by default S3 stores your data across multiple availability zones.
That basically means that as soon as you send an object to S3,
AWS is automatically copying that object across independent availability zones.
And then you get an acknowledge.
That means that at that point your file is saved securely across different locations.
Now, in all that process, at some point the data is being stored in a physical disk.
And you can also imagine that it's stored in many of them,
because of course if the data is living in independent locations,
there are independent disks that are keeping different copies of your data.
So you can imagine that managing all these disks is tricky,
and AWS needs to really have a solid process to check for physical device failure.
And they actually can predict when the devices fail,
and they can actually replace them before they actually break.
And they can do all of that without basically losing access to your data.
So they can still do all this swapping of disks and making sure that your data is always available and durable,
without you having any interruption of service.
There is another cool feature that you can enable, which is called cross-region replication.
So by default a bucket lives in one region, and the data is shared across multiple availability zones.
But if you want extra guarantees, or maybe you want lower latency because you might have
the necessity to access to that data from different locations around the world,
what you can do is you can enable this cross-region replication.
And what happens is basically for every object you create in a bucket,
you can replicate that object in other regions as well.
A bucket exists in other regions.
And you can even make the data available to any location through something called
AWS Global Accelerator. And we'll mention some around that a little bit later in this episode.
So hopefully that gives you an understanding of the scale and the things that AWS takes care of
for us when we use this service. So probably this is a good point now to jump to the first
performance tip.
... 10,000 parts and you don't even need to upload them in order. So every part is, I think,
between the limits. It has to be between five megabytes and five gigabytes per part.
So if you've got a three megabyte file, you wouldn't use a multi-part upload for it.
It has to be at least five megs. And AWS generally recommend you use something like eight or 16
megabytes for your part size. When you upload a single part, S3 will return to an entity tag,
also known as an ETag for the part. And you record that with the part number.
And when you do the third step in the process, which is complete multi-part upload,
then you essentially provide a manifest of all of the part numbers and ETags with that request.
You can even send AWS a checksum of the original file to make sure everything was transferred
correctly. And it's not a checksum of the entire object, but rather each individual part.
There's a link in the show notes to a user guide that will help you to understand that process.
You generally don't have to do this yourself since most of the SDKs include some higher level
abstraction in the API, or in the SDK for uploads and downloads, actually. But the upload part will
generally automatically use multi-part uploads when it makes sense. And we'll provide links to
code samples, the SDKs, including one example is the Node.js helper library, which is the lib
storage in the AWS SDK version three. You can also do some cool esoteric things with this as well.
I remember having a case before when we needed to essentially merge a lot of CSV files. And those
CSV files didn't have headers in them. So we were able to do that just using S3 features. Because
when you specify a part for a multi-part upload, it doesn't have to be something that's on your
client machine, it can also be an existing object on S3. So you can use it just to concatenate a
bunch of files on S3 without any of that data, leaving S3 and being transferred to your machine.
Now, let's get on to multi-part downloads, or as it's better known, byte range fetches. So when
you're doing a get object command, you can specify the start and end range for bytes. And if you want
to download the entire file, it's generally not built into the SDKs. But there are examples of
doing of implementing this yourself, we'll provide a link to that in the show notes.
There is a very interesting podcast episode and a library associated with it from our friends at
Cloudonaut. And they had a very specific need for one of their products to download large,
large objects from S3 in Node.js and implemented a highly optimized library for it. So you can check
that link out in the show notes as well. So that's tip one. Basically, use concurrency,
do multi-part uploads and byte range fetches for downloads. What else should we suggest, Luciano?
Another common thing is to try to spread the load across different key namespaces. And I
think to really understand this one, we need to explain a little bit how some of the details of
how S3 stores the object and what are some of the limits. Because if you look at the documentation,
what the documentation says is that you can do 3500 put, copy, post, or delete operations,
and 5500 get and head operations per prefix. And this is where things get a little bit confusing,
because what does it mean per prefix? And if you look at other parts of the documentation,
there is an official definition that says a prefix is a string of characters at the beginning of the
object key name. A prefix can be of any length, subject to the maximum length of the object key
name, which is 1204 bytes. You can think of prefixes as a way to organize your data in a
similar way to directories. However, prefixes are not directories. So you can kind of make the
parallel that a prefix is like saying, I don't know, "/home," "/luciano," "/documents," and then
the name of your object. But behind the scenes, AWS is not really maintaining a file system. It's
just a way for you to organize your data. What is interesting, though, is that somehow
AWS is using this information to distribute the data across multiple partitions. And this is
probably where the limit conversation comes from. You can do a certain amount of operations per
prefix, but that probably really means per partition. And this is something that is not
always entirely clear. What is the logic that AWS uses there to define how prefix maps to actual
physical partitions? So it's something that AWS tries to determine automatically, depending on
your usage patterns. But what we have seen in the wild is that if you really do lots of requests,
even if you have different prefixes, you can still get throttled and see 503 errors.
So it is really important if you're running at such scale to monitor the number of 503s,
because if you're using the SDK, there are retries. So eventually you might be able to
get your operation successfully performed. But that operation might take a long time,
because there is a loop of retries that is happening behind the scenes. So you need to
be aware if you're trying to get the best performance when retries are happening.
Another interesting thing that we bumped into working with one of our customers
is that we were still getting lots of 503s and at some point we decided to talk with support.
And it was a long conversation. We got lots of help from AWS, but it seems to be possible to get
AWS to tweak whatever is the internal mechanism for your specific use case. So if you're really
hitting all these limits and you don't know what else can you do, I think the best course
to action right now is to just open a ticket, try to talk with AWS, explain your use case.
And I think they might be able to discuss with you very custom options that are the best solution for
your particular use case. I think this is still very rare in the industry. We only had one use
case, at least that I can remember on in my career. But again, if you happen to do thousands and
thousands of requests to AWS per second, it's not unlikely that you're going to bump in this
particular limit action. So just be aware that there are solutions, even though the solution is
not necessarily well documented, but you can talk with AWS and they will help you to figure out the
solution. Overall, the idea is to try to think about namespaces that make sense and then distribute
your access, your operations to different namespaces if you want to leverage as much
requests per second as possible. What's the next one you have, Eoin?
The next one is going down to the network
level. So it's a fairly common design
pattern in networking
and files storage to horizontally scale
performance using multiple
connections. So if you're making
requests from one network device to
another, you might bump into some
bandwidth limits of that
device and devices in between. So
distributing the requests
across multiple devices, multiple
end-to-end connections can definitely
help you to achieve higher
throughput. So if an example of
that is born out, again, going back to
the Cloudonaut example, they realized that
connecting to S3 from
an EC2 instance, there's a limit of five
gigabits per single VPC flow.
And a VPC flow is defined as
combination of source IP, source port,
and then a destination IP
and destination port. And if
you're just doing a fairly simple HTTP
request to an S3 endpoint, you're going
to get a DNS lookup.
It's going to give you back an IP or a
set of IP addresses. Your
client is going to pick one
and make the connection to that IP
address. But if you're a
little bit smarter about it,
you can take all of the IP addresses for
S3 back and use that to
get multiple connections
from your source to the destination. And
that's exactly what that
clever library from Cloudonaut
did. It's something this load balancing
on the client is
something that the AWS CRT,
the Common Runtime does as well. So the
AWS CRT library, which is
used in the Java SDK and Boto3
as well, has the capability to do that
and do all this download performance
optimization too. So
it's worth checking out. And then as
well, on the topic of network
connections, different
environments vary, different EC2
instances have different bandwidth
characteristics on the network
devices. And then you have enhanced
networking and elastic fabric
adapter to really squeeze more
performance out of it. Also bear in mind
that when you're running
an AWS Lambda, your network
connection size depends on your memory
configuration because it's linearly
proportional. So if you're
finding that bandwidth is a constraint,
you might think about,
"Okay, well, can I do multiple
downloads and multiple functions or do I
just need to up the
memory so that I get maximum IO
throughput on that as well?" So that's
the lower level performance
tips. What else do we have, Luciano?
Another interesting one is the
usage of the edge. Let's
call it like that. The idea is
that you can enable something like Amazon
S3 transfer acceleration.
This is more when you have
use cases where you might, for instance,
be building a web
application and you might have users
that are connecting from all around the
globe. And of course, if you
store your data in a bucket
that exists only one region, you might
have good latency for all
the users that are close to the
region and very poor latency for all the
other users that may be
very far away from the region.
So one way that you can solve this
particular problem and give
more or less similar performance
to all the users, regardless of where
they are around the globe, is
to enable this feature called
transfer acceleration. And there are some
data that AWS shares in
their marketing page where
they say that this can improve as much as
between 50 and 500% performance for
long-distance transfer
of large objects. So that means, imagine
that you have a bucket somewhere in
Europe and a user from
Australia is connected to that bucket.
You can imagine that there
is by default significant
latency, but enabling this kind of
feature will reduce that latency
significantly. And this is
a feature that you need to enable
because, of course, there is a
significant complexity to
make all of this happen for you. Data is
replicated effectively
around the globe for you.
So it's something that you enable it and
you need to be aware that you pay a
premium price for it.
So it's not a free feature. So of course,
it makes sense to use it
only when you really have that
particular type of use case, not just
enable it because it might
seem like a convenient thing to
do. And if you know CloudFront, this
feature is effectively leveraging
CloudFront under the hood
and is just distributing the data across
different edge locations and then using
the AWS Packable Networks to make sure
that the connection between
your actual region and the edge
location is as fast as it could be. This
is a feature that you need
to enable at the bucket level.
So you just go to the bucket setting and
you can enable it there
either from the UI or with the CLI.
And effectively, then when you want to
download a file from S3
using this particular feature,
you have to specify a special endpoint
that is called
https://s3-accelerate.amazonaws.com
So that basically, rather than going
directly through the bucket endpoint,
is going to go through this special
endpoint that uses the Edge Network.
Now we can give you a lot more details,
but it's probably going to be more useful
for you to redirect to the documentation
page. We have a link in the
show notes if we're curious
to really find out how do you really
enable this and kind of how
to with all the steps that you
need to follow if you really want to
implement this particular feature.
And the other option is if you are just
building a website, for
instance, and you want to make sure
that all the static assets of that
website are available in the edge
locations, you can use
CloudFront directly. So you just enable a
CloudFront distribution.
CloudFront is effectively a CDN.
So that will make your object available
in different locations
around the world. AWS
claims that they have about 400 edge
locations. So this is
probably going to have a good
coverage for all around the globe. And
yeah, if you're doing all
of that, there is another
extra advantage because at that point you
are serving an entire
website from an S3 bucket.
But if you just enable the S3 website
feature, that by default is
only HTTP, which is not really
ideal these days. You probably want to
have HTTPS. When you use CloudFront, you
also get support for
HTTPS. So that's one more reason to use
CloudFront when you are
serving just static assets for a
website. That I think concludes this tip.
So what do we have next?
The next one and final one is a bit neat
maybe, but if your
application relates to tabular data,
like analytics or data science, you can
leverage some of the
great tools that optimize data
retrieval from S3 for you to avoid
reading data that you don't need. And
this goes back to our
byte range fetch really, but it's also
saying some of the tools are already
doing this for you on
the hood and you don't even really need
to think about how it works. And the
simplest one of all is
S3 Select. This is an S3 API. It's
available in all the SDKs
and in the console. And it's
pretty straightforward. It allows you to
retrieve specific rows and
columns of data from S3 using
a simple SQL-like syntax. So you could do
select columns from table,
where, and put some simple
where clause. There's no joins or
anything complicated like
that in it. It's just for
a single table. And that avoids you
having to retrieve large
volumes of data over the network
and you push the heavy lifting onto S3.
Now, if you're doing
something a bit more complicated
and you're in this space, you might be
familiar with the arrow,
which is core to a lot of these
data science tools, the arrow library and
format tools built on top
of it, like pandas and polars
and DuckDB. These all ensure you don't
have to read all of the
data if you don't need it,
particularly if you're using optimized
column number formats like
Parquet. All of these tools
can intelligently like with Parquet file,
for example, the
metadata describing what data is
in it is at the bottom of it. So those
tools will go read the
footer from the Parquet file,
then they can figure out where the
columns are stored in the
file and where the row groups are
that's split into groups. And then they
can retrieve only the
data you need. Polars and
DuckDB are particularly fast when it
comes to this kind of use
case. They'll leverage those
byte range queries automatically for you
and are surprisingly fast
in how they can run and are
already putting a lot of engineering
effort into optimizing things
like object retrieval from S3.
So you don't even have to think about it.
So in terms of additional
resources, we're going to
throw a bunch of links in the show notes,
which we hope are valuable,
including some performance
guidelines on S3 and design patterns.
Apart from that, let us know if you have
any more S3 performance
tips. I'm sure there's more out there.
Just let us know in the
comments. Thanks very much for
joining us this time, and we'll see you
in the next episode.